+++
title = "In-person Meeting"

date = 2018-12-05T13:51:56-08:00
# lastmod = 2018-09-09T00:00:00

draft = false  # Is this a draft? true/false
toc = true  # Show table of contents? true/false
type = "docs"  # Do not modify.

# Add menu entry to sidebar.
linktitle = "March 23, 2018 (in-person)"
[menu.meetings]
  parent = "Delta SIT"
  weight = 3
+++

## March 23, 2018

# Sacramento, CA

## Participants
Jim Peterson, Ben Geske, Dave Mooney, Ty Deweber, Chuck Hanson, Bread Cavallo, Sheila Greene, Campbell Ingram, You Chen Chao, Sakura Evans, Victor Pacheco, Mike Hendrick, Erin McCreless, Mike Urkov, Mario Manzo, Gabrielle Boisrame, Ken Kundargi, Deana Sereno, Ammon Danielson, Josh Israel, Brett Harvey, Dave Fullerton, Evan Carson, Rod Wittler

## Notes/Action Items:

- Jim reviewed the conceptual models from the CVPIA SIT model, and Salmon Resiliency Strategy model.
- Jim suggested that the group can start with these, or start from scratch.
- The group chose to use the SIT model and fill in the &quot;black box&quot; for the Delta portion
- Include barging or trucking as actions in this version??
- Created conceptual models for movement, survival, and growth.
- Revisited the action-consequence spreadsheet to see whether we can/are cross-walking appropriately … can we capture effects of actions in conceptual model
- Who at the water board is monitoring surface water contaminants (Ben – check around)
- Follow-up on Frank tract restoration information…in a month or two.
- Erik Loboschefski … can he help define a short list of realistic and near term restoration projects (Ben will foloow-up)
- Victor Pacheco shared their report on the electrofishing.
- Brad to look at the SIT model with regards to how it may be modified to help produce metrics for his proposed actions.
- Looked at potential data sources to represent each bubble in the conceptual models. (Jim took notes on data sources, and some were even shared during the meeting via email).
- Ben ~ Ask Ryan Reeves about estimated entrainment into Steamboat and Sutter with potential non-physical barriers.
- Ben ~ Ask Jacob about South Delta predator and ag barrier report .. is it available yet?
- Ben ~ Ask Bill McLaughlin … Stockton DO project .. survival benefits.
- Action items for individuals to share data references (from Jim)
- Suggestions for next conference call agenda items … Scotts ideas .. Mike data portal ..
- Agenda for next workshop … send out early. (Jim and Ben have already sent this out)
- Set up conference call with Graham and Sally, mike hendrick etc to strategize moving forward. (Ben has scheduled this meeting already)
- How, who, when to bring in operations folks. (Dave Mooney and Jim Peterson)

- OSU and project members - track down documents and data sources for OSU facilitators
- Ben Geske and Mike Hendricks - Contact Delta smelt experts and decision support model developers (Graham and Sally) to attend April SDM workshop
  - Send CVPIA information
  - Contact to get information regarding DSS
- Dave Mooney - compile list of key operations people for later meetings (perhaps in June)

## Delta Conceptual models and CVPIA SIT model integration

After a thorough discussion, the group determined that it would be beneficial to use the CVPIA SIT models developed by Jim Peterson to represent salmon population processes upstream of the delta. This model will provide numbers of smolts in four age classes entering the delta through each of the major tributaries. The Delta SDM group will focus on developing more detailed conceptual models for Chinook salmon moving through the Delta.

## Conceptual models

The group developed conceptual models for juvenile Chinook salmon growth, survival and movement within the delta. Conceptual models are included in these notes and are available in &quot;BayDeltaSDM\_ChinookConceptualModels\_23Mar2018.pptm&quot;. We then reviewed each of the proposed management alternatives and determined that all could be evaluated with the developed conceptual models.

## Spatial framework

The group identified a spatial framework based on previous projects that provides sufficient detail for understanding juvenile Chinook salmon growth, survival, and movement within the delta and responses to alternative management actions. The map notes for developing spatial framework are attached to these notes, and will be developed into a single map for future meetings. The spatial framework includes regions 1-7 from a publication by Russ Perry et al. (slide 1), reworked lower delta sections from a publication by Ken Newman et al. (slide 2), and detailed sections for the Suisun marsh area from Hamilton and Murphy (slide 3).

## Available Information

The group then identified available information for each of the nodes in the conceptual models that affect juvenile chinook salmon growth, survival, or movement within the delta.  These sources included technical and peer-reviewed publications from the delta and elsewhere, individuals with knowledge or reports, and data sources that could be used to parameterize a decision model. The sources were recorded in an excel spreadsheet and many others have been forwarded to the group by individuals following the meeting.  Jim Peterson and Erin McCreless (PostDoc) from Oregon State will be reviewing available information and developing a decision model with group input.

## Upcoming Meetings

The next conference call scheduled for April 13th from 9-11 AM. The next in-person meeting on April 27th will focus on developing a conceptual model for delta smelt that will help guide decision model development.

## Conceptual Models

Juvenile movement conceptual model
![](/img/2018-03-23-pic1.png)

Juvenile Chinook survival conceptual model
![](/img/2018-03-23-pic2.png)

Juvenile Chinook growth conceptual model
![](/img/2018-03-23-pic3.png)

## Spatial Framework Maps (3 pages)
![](/img/2018-03-23-pic4.png)
![](/img/2018-03-23-pic5.png)
![](/img/2018-03-23-pic6.png)



