+++
title = "Conference Call"

date = 2018-12-05T13:51:56-08:00
# lastmod = 2018-09-09T00:00:00

draft = false  # Is this a draft? true/false
toc = true  # Show table of contents? true/false
type = "docs"  # Do not modify.

# Add menu entry to sidebar.
linktitle = "April 13, 2018 (conference call)"
[menu.meetings]
  parent = "Delta SIT"
  weight = 993
+++

## April 13, 2018

## Participants:
Ben Geske, Jim Peterson, Bruce DiGennaro, Mark Tompkins, Dave Mooney, Ammon Danielson, Denise Reed, Rod Wittler, Erin McCreless, Pablo Arroyave, Evan Carson, Scott Hamilton, Joe Heublein, Chuck Hanson, Griffin Hill, Mike Urkov, Matt Nobriga, Deanna Sereno

## Conference Call Meeting Notes:
- Send out the latest version of “Roles and Responsibilities”, and ask for more feedback (Ben)
- Work with EcoRestore and the Delta Science Program adaptive management liaisons to create a short list of restoration projects (in      detail) to consider (Ben)
- Work with Rebeca B. regarding the analysis of the DO study in Stockton (Jim and Erin)
- Look into the predation study component from the BAFF and FFGS pilot studies (Ben)
- Wild salmon study information? (Brad)
- WQ- contaminants effect on salmon information (does anybody have a reference for this? (all)
- Build example “portal” and send to SDM team (Mike U.)
- Draft report on CAMT Delta Smelt SDM effort coming soon and will share with team (Bruce D.)
    - Our intentions are to have complimentary efforts here
- Scott Hamilton Power Point presentation – if folks want more information, Scott can share (Scott)
- Send Jim and/or Ben you preferences regarding map partitioning. Do you have alternative sources? (all)


