+++
title = "Conference Call"

date = 2018-12-05T13:51:56-08:00
# lastmod = 2018-09-09T00:00:00

draft = false  # Is this a draft? true/false
toc = true  # Show table of contents? true/false
type = "docs"  # Do not modify.

# Add menu entry to sidebar.
linktitle = "November 30, 2018 (conference call)"
[menu.meetings]
  parent = "Delta SIT"
  weight = 3
+++

## November 30, 2018 [Slides](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/deltasdm-documents/meeting-notes/conference-meetings/Nov+30+2018+conference+call.pptx)

## Participants:
Jim Peterson, Erin McCreless, Chris Kwan, Denise Reed, Derek Hilts, Emanuel Rodriguez, James Gilbert, Jim Shannon, Matt Nobriga, Mike Beakes, Mike Urkov, Scott Hamilton, You Chen Chao, Zack Leady, JD Wikert, Chuck Hanson, Derya Sumer, Mike Hendrick, Shawn Acuña, Michael Eakin, Cambpell Ingram, Darcy Austin, Mario Manzo, Sheila Greene, Ben Geske, Bjarni Serup, Felipe La Luz, Russ Freeman, Kevin Clark, Chandra Chilmakuri, Brett Harvey, Josh Israel

## CalSim results

James Gilbert (USBR) presented the results of each CalSim scenario run. Results summaries and graphs are in the meeting powerpoint.

- Baseline

- Summer X2 requirements

- OMR flow changes

- Remove San Joaquin I:E and add tributary pulse flow

- Yolo Bypass flows

- Preferential pumping at Jones

## Chinook model

Waiting on revised habitat estimates for model; scheduled completion in 2 weeks. Russ Perry provided updates on survival through the North Delta and these are being included in the model. Visualization tools are in process.

## Data visualization 

Emanuel Rodriguez and Mike Urkov (FlowWest) are working on visualization tools for Chinook routing models and the consequence table. We will email out preliminary versions of these when they are ready, and will also add them to the [website](deltasdm.com). 

## Delta Smelt – modeling zooplankton

Approach for modeling Delta smelt prey availability resulting from Yolo pulse flow action:

- use DWR zooplankton sampling data to compare zooplankton biomass in August-September 2015 (dry year) to 2016 (below normal year with flow pulse in mid-July) at the sampling locations corresponding to the Yolo/Cache complex in the Rose/Smith model

- focusing on the six zooplankton groups used in the Rose/Smith model

- zooplankton biomass was 2-9x higher in 2016 (mean 5.1, variance 9)

- will use these values to model a range of proportional increases in zooplankton from the Yolo pulse flow action in the Delta smelt models

Comments:

- Should we include wet years in this analysis as well?

- Water year type may not matter in the late summer except possibly in extremely wet years

- Can look at Dayflow data to see net flow out of Yolo Bypass

## Ag revenue

Josue Medellin (UC Merced) has agreed to do the work but we&#39;re still looking for resources to fund him. Given the bureaucratic issues and time required to create a contract, we probably won&#39;t have time to include ag revenue in this rapid prototyping phase. But, we will try to keep it moving forward so ag revenue can be included in phase 2. Ben said that at a recent meeting of the Integrated Modeling Steering Committee, there was discussion of bringing more agricultural economics experts into the group.

## Timeline

We aim to have preliminary model results ready to present to the group during the January 11 conference call. At the in-person meeting January 25, we plan to show results, data visualization tools, and sensitivity analyses, and describe assumptions and discuss results with the group.