+++
title = "In-Person Meeting"

date = 2018-12-05T13:51:56-08:00
# lastmod = 2018-09-09T00:00:00

draft = false  # Is this a draft? true/false
toc = true  # Show table of contents? true/false
type = "docs"  # Do not modify.

# Add menu entry to sidebar.
linktitle = "November 22, 2019 (in-person)"
[menu.meetings]
  parent = "Delta SIT"
  weight = 975
+++

## Summary and Action Items

## Participants

### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Bill Bennett, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment and Center for Watershed Sciences
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Mike Eakin, California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW)
* Ben Geske, Delta Science Program (DSP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District
* Kate Spear, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)


### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Nora De Cuir, Kearns & West 
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management


## Action Items
* Compass will continue to develop    the Technical Working Group’s (TWG's) decision support system concept and   scenarios approach.
  * Compass will schedule a call with Bill, Scott, Mike Beakes, and Lauren to brainstorm.
* TWG members knowledgeable in the six priority topics to help prepare the group for deeper discussions of these issues. 
  * Compass will follow up with Lauren to help prepare for the presentation on spawning at the next meeting. 
  * The Project Team will ask for volunteers to present at subsequent meetings.
* Kearns & West will poll TWG members on meetings dates for 2020.


## Key Agreements or Outcomes 
TWG members identified six priority topics for in-depth examination over the next several meetings: entrainment, food, number of reproduction adults (spawning/fecundity), predation, temperature, and transient habitat. Additionally, TWG members supported exploring a proposed scenarios approach and a proposed decision support system.

## Introductions

The Project Team reviewed the agenda and reminded TWG members that the group will strive for consensus on technical and policy matters. It will be possible to carry forward competing hypotheses, and areas of consensus and non-consensus will be documented. If any areas of disagreement become particularly complex, they will be elevated to CAMT. 


## Working Group Discussion
* Impact Pathway Prioritization Approach: Review Synopsis of Input Received* 
* The Project Team briefly reviewed the results of the impact pathway screening exercise and asked TWG members to sort each mechanism into the following categories.
    * A: Highest interest in examining further
    * B: Moderate interest in examining further
    * C: Lower interest in examining further
    * D: Not worth examining further


*Detailed Discussion on Priority Topics*


The group began with a discussion of temperature.

* The screening exercise indicated TWG members regard temperature effects as severe during the December to March/adult to larvae period.
* TWG members suggested temperature might be sufficiently addressed by the modeling effort and therefore not a high priority for additional consideration at this time.
* Some TWG members suggested a C rating for all life stages, while others felt the juvenile bottleneck period should be rated A. 
* The group agreed to give temperature a provisional B rating for all life stages.

The group moved on to discuss food visibility. 

* The screening exercise suggested food visibility was not a significant problem for adults. 
* TWG members agreed that food visibility becomes less important as delta smelt grow older.
* The group agreed to give food visibility a D rating for all life stages except May to March/larvae to juveniles, which was rated C as there are known issues with food visibility during this life stage.

Next, the group agreed to rate toxic algal blooms as a D for all life stages.

The group moved into a discussion of entrainment.

* TWG members acknowledged that the recently released BiOps could ultimately affect which management actions are most appropriate.
* TWG members noted that entrainment was more important for larvae than for juveniles and subadults. 
* A TWG member observed that the effect of entrainment on spawning is not yet understood.
* A TWG member felt the entrainment of adults has been considered extensively in other processes and was not worth exploring again with this group.
* The group recognized that there was a lack of agreement among TWG members, and therefore entrainment is a topic they should explore further.
* The group agreed that screened diversions were not a significant issue and gave this topic a D rating for all life stages.
* The group agreed that entrainment related to exports during December to March/adult to larvae and March to May/larvae to juveniles was worth further consideration and provisionally rated these stages an A/B, and gave the rest of the year a D rating.
*	The group agreed that unscreened diversions were not significant for the December to March/adult to larvae period but could be worth additional discussion for the remaining life stages. December to March was rated D and the rest of the year provisionally rated B/C.

The group discussed toxicity from contaminants.

* The group first clarified that pesticide effects on food quality (arthropods) and subsequent effect on fish is an indirect impact in this exercise; if necessary, this would be captured in the discussion on food.
    * TWG members noted that lesions have been observed on delta smelt as a result of contaminants, but this does not prevent them from reproducing.
    * A TWG member commented that gonadal issues have been observed in some delta smelt and contaminants could prevent them from spawning.
    * A TWG member remarked that contaminants tend to be less of an issue during the summer.
    * The group agreed to give contaminants a B rating for all life stages except August to November/subadults to adults, which was rated C.


The group considered how to rate predation.

* The group agreed to fold all subcategories of predation (i.e. turbidity, number of predators, exposure, and delta smelt condition) into a single, general predation topic.
* Some TWG members observed that turbidity is decreasing throughout the Delta, which has the potential to increase predation pressures on delta smelt.
* Another member mentioned the legislation on bag limits for striped bass.
* Some TWG members commented that the amount of predation may not be changing, but the types of predators are shifting (e.g., shift away from migratory birds).
* Some TWG members noted that the silverside population has exploded in the last decade and predation by silversides appears to be a significant spatial issue and potential bottleneck for young delta smelt. 
* The group agreed to give predation a provisional A/B rating for the December to March/adult to larvae and March to May/larvae to juvenile periods, and a C rating for the rest of the year.


TWG members discussed the remaining food pathways (quantity, quality, and access).

*	The group agreed to combine these three food mechanisms into a single topic, though some TWG members noted that lifecycle models likely address these issues separately.
*	A TWG member commented that delta smelt diet studies have relied on examination of fish guts because it is difficult to sample prey at the scale at which delta smelt feed.
*	TWG members asked several questions about how food quantity, quality, and prey type are addressed in the Rose model and the USFWS lifecycle model.
*	A member reminded the group that reoperation of the Suisun Marsh salinity control gate is intended to increase food availability.
*	The group agreed that food quantity, quality, and access should be discussed in greater detail and gave this topic an initial B rating for all life stages.

The group moved on to consider the number of reproductive adults.

*	The Project Team reminded TWG members that they discussed this issue (particularly the Allee effect) at a previous meeting.
*	A TWG member suggested that the information they need to address this topic already exists, they group just needs to review and apply that data.
*	Some TWG members had questions about how the Rose model handled spawning events.
*	The group agreed to rate this topic as A/B and have an in-depth discussion on spawning and fecundity at the next TWG meeting.


Finally, TWG members discussed how to rate stationary habitat, transient habitat, and rearing habitat.

* TWG members commented that increased growth of aquatic vegetation has reduced delta smelt habitat. 
* TWG members noted that uncertainty is high around spawning habitat because little is known about delta smelt spawning locations. 
* There was some disagreement among TWG members regarding how aquatic vegetation has affected delta smelt, but the group agreed that habitat was a limiting factor in delta smelt abundance and something worth exploring further.
* The group rated all habitat categories a B for all life stages (though rearing habitat applies only to May to November/juveniles to adults).


The Project Team asked TWG members to review their initial ratings for all topics and consider if any ratings should be adjusted.

* The group agreed to change the following B ratings to A ratings:
    * Transient habitat for all life stages
    * Food (quantity, quality, and access) for March to November/larvae to adult
    * Temperature for December to March/adult to larvae and May to August/juvenile to subadult
* The ranking exercise identified six priority topics:
    * Entrainment (water exports)
    * Food (quantity, quality, access)
    * Number of reproductive adults
    * Predation
    * Temperature
* Transient habitat


The full ranking table is shown below.
 
The Project Team explained that the next steps for each priority topic would be to identify key documents, determine if and how an issue has been incorporated into conceptual models in the past, incorporate the TWG’s collective knowledge into a lifecycle modeling effort, and identify key uncertainties that could be addressed.


*Scenario-Based Approach: Discuss Potential Options and Next Steps*


The Project Team asked TWG members what tools and analyses they might be interested in applying to a scenarios-based approach.

* TWG members suggested identifying key bottlenecks and then thinking about what combination of factors are interacting during those events.
    * The Project Team noted that historical data could be used to help understand these combinations of factors.
* TWG members indicated support for developing a long-term strategy geared toward decision makers that includes a suite of flexible management actions and guidance on when to trigger those actions.
* The Project Team asked if it would be worthwhile to explore a few bottleneck scenarios as case studies. The scenarios could explore typical circumstances or combinations of conditions and what management actions might be appropriate.
    * TWG members agreed this was worth exploring.
    * The Project Team will coordinate with TWG members to help develop realistic examples of bottlenecks.
* One TWG member suggested a potential framework for a long-term decision support system. The proposed approach identifies the conditions that must be met for a successful transition from one life stage to the next and appropriate actions to apply if those conditions are not met naturally. Management actions will only be applied when they are most beneficial (i.e. if the population already collapsed over the summer, additional actions would not be taken during the fall).
    * The group agreed this approach was worth developing and the Project Team will schedule a call with interested TWG members to discuss further.


## Next Steps and Work Planning

*Upcoming Meetings*

* The next meeting will be a webinar on Friday, December 6 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. The meeting will include a presentation on spawning and continued discussion of the scenarios approach. 
* The Project Team will poll TWG members for potential meeting dates in 2020. 

