+++
title = "Conference Call"

date = 2018-12-05T13:51:56-08:00
# lastmod = 2018-09-09T00:00:00

draft = false  # Is this a draft? true/false
toc = true  # Show table of contents? true/false
type = "docs"  # Do not modify.

# Add menu entry to sidebar.
linktitle = "November 08, 2019 (conference call)"
[menu.meetings]
  parent = "Delta SIT"
  weight = 976
+++

## Technical Working Group Meeting 3


## Participants
### Technical Working Group: 
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Ben Geske, Delta Science Program (DSP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Deanna Serena, Contra Costa Water District
* Will Smith, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)

### Project Team: 
* Nora De Cuir, Kearns & West
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Bruce DiGennaro, The Essex Partnership/CSAMP Program Manager

## Action Items
* Compass to update hypothesis screening spreadsheet and recirculate to Technical Working Group (TWG) members (complete).
* TWG members to complete updated hypothesis screening spreadsheet exercise and submit to Compass by November 15 (in progress).
* The Project Team will prepare to discuss decision-making principles/process guidelines at the next meeting.

## Key Agreements or Outcomes 
TWG members agreed on an approach to anonymity and document sharing. Internal and working documents as well as discussions within the TWG will be attributed, while any products or documents that are shared outside the TWG will be anonymized. The group had an extensive discussion about how to most efficiently and effectively narrow down the list of impact pathways. The group felt discussing individual pathways collectively was valuable, but also time-consuming. TWG members agreed to proceed with a second iteration of the hypothesis screening exercise. The next TWG meeting will use the results of the screening exercise to help sort the pathways into high, medium, and low priority “bins.” 

## Introductions, Updates, and Reminders
The Project Team reminded TWG members that the group was in the first of three steps in the impact pathway prioritization process: screening for major impact mechanisms and gathering information on lines of evidence. As part of this preliminary step, the Project Team asked TWG members to complete version 6 of the hypothesis screening spreadsheet. Eight TWG members provided responses before the meeting.

Prior to reviewing the preliminary results of the screening exercise, the TWG discussed how to approach anonymity in meetings, documents, and work products.        

* Some TWG members preferred to remain anonymous when discussing, for example, responses to the screening exercise in order to avoid introducing biases into the conversation. 
* Other TWG members felt internal discussions should be open and attributed, emphasizing the importance of a transparent process and recognizing that it would be difficult to have in-depth conversations about members’ viewpoints and maintain anonymity. 
* TWG members expressed an interest in following the same protocols used in previous Delta Smelt processes. 
* Ultimately, the group agreed that internal discussions and working documents would be attributed, but any work products or other information or documents shared outside of the TWG would be anonymized.


## Working Group Discussion


### Impact Pathway Prioritization Approach


The Project Team shared the initial results from the hypothesis screening exercise based on the eight responses received from TWG members. They also provided examples of different ways to summarize and visualize the response data, and explained how these tools might help structure future conversations.

TWG members sought clarification on how to interpret and respond to Questions 1c, 1b, and 1c. 

* The Project Team explained that the intent of Question 1a, “On a frequent basis (i.e. in more than 50% of years), how severe can be the impact of this hypothesis on DS abundance?” was to ask, “for an impact you have determined to be frequent, rate its severity”. 
* The group agreed to remove Question 1b (“On a less frequent basis (i.e. between 10% and 50% of years), how severe can be the impact of this hypothesis on DS abundance?”), and rephrase Questions 1a and 1c (“In rare or episodic cases (i.e. less than 10% of years), how severe can be the impact of this hypothesis on DS abundance?”). The first questions would instead focus on the severity of a hypothesis in typical years and the severity of a hypothesis episodically.
The group discussed modifying the confidence rating (Question 2, “Overall, how confident are you about your answers to 1a, 1b and 1c for this hypothesis?”).
* A TWG member proposed scaling the confidence ratings to account for relative differences between users.
* Another TWG member suggested the confidence rating should account for lines of evidence.
* TWG members felt that expert opinions should be weighed over a majority vote.
TWG members considered how to most effectively and efficiently proceed with the impact pathway prioritization process.
* A TWG member noted that the results of the screening exercise were complicated by respondents interpreting questions differently. They suggested that instead of using the screening exercise to narrow the breadth of topics, the TWG should discuss each impact pathway one by one. These conversations would allow experts on a particular topic to share their knowledge and help the group gain a common understanding of the relevant pathways.
* TWG members recognized that talking through each of the over 50 pathways would be time-consuming. 
* The Project Team offered three potential paths forward.
* The Project Team could revise the hypothesis screening spreadsheet to improve the clarity and context of the questions and TWG members could complete another iteration of the screening exercise.
* The group could collectively walk through the screening exercise and discuss each item individually.
* The group could take a hybrid approach that uses another iteration of the screening exercise to help frame a discussion of which pathways should be considered in the next step of the process.
* TWG members agreed to take a hybrid approach. The Project Team would refine the screening exercise and recirculate to TWG members, and the group would discuss one pathway in detail to get a sense for how long it might take to complete the exercise collectively.


As a test case, the group discussed the following pathway from the December to March/Adult to Larvae stage: “Reduced number of reproductive adults has decreased fecundity (Allee effect)”.

* TWG members clarified that the Allee effect was a density effect that affected population fecundity, not individual fecundity.
* Some TWG members felt that the number of reproductive adults was not a critical issue and there is no evidence that links a greater number of reproductive adults with a greater number of offspring. Instead, the length of the spawning window is more important because Delta Smelt are capable of spawning multiple times in a single season. Multiple spawning events can generate relatively high numbers of offspring despite low abundance of adults.
* Other TWG members argued that as a basic ecological principle, and all else equal, then the number of reproductive adults was a fundamental factor in the overall Delta Smelt population.
* The group agreed that existing information suggests that increasing the number of reproductive adults alone would not lead to more larvae, but if other population bottlenecks were addressed then consideration could be given to management actions aimed directly at increasing the number of reproductive adults. 


TWG members agreed to a process for prioritizing pathways.

* The group decided to collectively sort each pathway into “bins” as an initial means of prioritizing the full set of hypotheses.
* Bin A would capture pathways TWG members considered controversial, potentially significant, frequently occurring, and/or associated with a feasible management action.
* Bin A could be further subdivided into A1 for issues with full agreement, A2 for issues with most TWG members in agreement, and so on.
* Bin C would capture the opposite, i.e. pathways TWG members considered noncontroversial, insignificant, infrequent, or lacking feasible management actions.
* Bin B would capture anything in between.
* Rather than look at pathways with the highest average confidence, the group would focus their discussion on pathways with the highest individual confidence ratings (i.e. anything with a 4 or 5).
* TWG members sought clarification on the process for eliminating pathways (i.e. sorting into Bins B or C), and asked if consensus was required.
* The group agreed to discuss this at the next meeting. 
* TWG members acknowledged the value of adding comments to the spreadsheet (i.e. providing robust response to Question 3, “What circumstances lead to this pathway becoming particularly problematic? (e.g. high temperatures combined with low delta outflows etc?)”).


## Next Steps and Work Planning


### Upcoming Meetings
* Friday, November 22, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., in-person workshop at the State Water Contractor’s Large Conference Room. The group will use the results of the second iteration of the screening exercise to sort the impact pathways into different priority “bins.”



### Communications Protocols
* TWG members are encouraged to share any substantive email conversations with the full group to help ensure a transparent process. 
* The Project Team will share what they learn from follow-up conversations with individual TWG members with the full group.
* All decisions for this process will be made during TWG meetings.  
