+++
title = "In-Person Meeting"

date = 2018-12-05T13:51:56-08:00
# lastmod = 2018-09-09T00:00:00

draft = false  # Is this a draft? true/false
toc = true  # Show table of contents? true/false
type = "docs"  # Do not modify.

# Add menu entry to sidebar.
linktitle = "October 23, 2019 (in-person)"
[menu.meetings]
  parent = "Delta SIT"
  weight = 977
+++


## October 23, 2019

## Summary and Action Items

## Participants
* Technical Working Group: Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD), Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR), Erin Cole, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS), Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP), Mike Eakin, California Department of Fish & Wildlife (CDFW), Ben Geske, Delta Science Program (DSP), Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta, Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment, Deanna Serena, Contra Costa Water District, Kate Spear, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Will Smith, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Project Team: Nora De Cuir, Kearns & West,  Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West, Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management, Graham Long, Compass Resource Management, Bruce DiGennaro, The Essex Partnership/CSAMP Program Manager
* Guest Presenter: Mike Urkov, FlowWest

## Action Items
* Compass to update hypothesis screening spreadsheet and recirculate to Technical Working Group (TWG) members (complete)
* Compass to follow-up with TWG members as needed to clarify input or discuss comments
* TWG members to complete spreadsheet exercise and submit to Compass by November 1
* TWG members to share feedback on webinar tools with Nora and Mary Beth
* TWG members to share venue recommendations/preferences for November meetings with Nora and Mary Beth

## Key Agreements or Outcomes 


* TWG members agreed to further develop the proposed holistic approach, noting value in the potential for powerful visualizations and the ability to both incorporate historical data and develop predictive models. The group had an extensive discussion of the hypothesis screening spreadsheet and agreed to many refinements to the set of hypotheses. TWG members also agreed to organize the screening spreadsheet by life stage transitions rather than life stage and to incorporate severity as well as frequency in the first rating question. The next TWG meeting will focus on the results of step one of the impact pathway exercise as well as a discussion of analysis tools. 

## Detailed Summary Notes

## Introductions, Updates, and Reminders
* The Project Team shared the project goal statement, which will serve as the guiding statement for the project: 
    * Reverse the trajectory of the Delta Smelt population from one in decline to one experiencing overall      increases within five to ten generations.
    * To achieve this goal CSAMP members will work collaboratively and with urgency to prioritize and implement management actions that are targeted at known or hypothesized stressors, habitat needs or other critical factors affecting the Delta Smelt population and to learn through implementation.
* The Project Team reviewed how the goal statement was developed.
    * The Project Team drafted options, which were reviewed and refined by the Steering Committee. 
    * The Collaborative Adaptive Management Team (CAMT) felt the original goal statement was too long, so the Project Team revised and shortened the language. 
    * These revisions were shared with the Steering Committee on October 18, and they adopted the statement with a few minor but not insignificant changes. 
    * The revised goal statement will be brought to the Policy Group on October 30.
* The Project Team reminded the TWG of the work plan for the next two years. 
    * The Project Team is currently in Step 2 of the current phase of work, and this step is anticipated to carry on for the next six to eight months. 
    * During this time, the TWG will define specific project objectives, subobjectives, and performance measures, as well as explore estimation methods and screen candidate management actions.
* The Project Team explained that this meeting would focus on two topics: impact pathway prioritization and the holistic (or scenario) approach. 
    * Impact pathway prioritization will be a three-step process: 
        * Step 1: screening for major impact mechanisms and gathering information on lines of evidence;
        * Step 2: assessing the potential for additional feasible management actions to mitigate an impact pathway as a limiting factor and determining the potential to learn more about a pathway in a way that might be relevant to future decision making; and 
        * Step 3: identifying which management actions to prioritize for exploring in greater detail. 
        * The Project Team envisions some back and forth between the screening and holistic approaches. The next section of the presentation will describe the details of a proposed holistic approach.

## Working Group Discussion

## Developing a Holistic/Scenarios Approach
* The Project Team acknowledged that they had been challenged by several TWG members to take a more holistic or scenario-based approach. This strategy would help address the following feedback:
    * Desire to treat bottlenecks (i.e. combinations of factors that come together to cause problems) rather than just individual symptoms.
    * Desire to avoid suggesting that a single issue is the key to addressing Delta Smelt populations, e.g. if predation is identified as an important impact pathway, fixing predation will solve the problem.
    * Interest in developing a conditional approach that can assess the specifics of a situations prior to determining a preferred action
* The Project Team anticipates that the impact pathway and holistic approaches will inform and clarify each other, and hopefully merge over time.
* The Project Team engaged in follow-up conversations with several TWG members to provide additional guidance on structuring the holistic approach.
    * A relatively small number of criteria may help identify what factor or combination of factors might be limiting Delta Smelt populations during each life stage.
    * Each life stage inherits the outcome of the events that occurred in the previous life stage.
* The Project Team shared Minard’s “Carte Figurative” as an example of how the team might frame the holistic approach.
    * Consider how conditions will change over time and how that may impact Delta Smelt populations.
    * Consider what the abundance might be at a given time of year, and what combination of conditions might lead to recruitment or reductions in Delta Smelt populations.
    * Assemble the   data (e.g., temperature, delta outflows, X2 position, etc.) that correlates with the expansion and contraction of Delta Smelt abundance over time.
    * Identify recurring scenarios that might help identify which actions would be the most appropriate under certain conditions.
* The Project Team asked the TWG members the following questions:
    * Is this holistic concept helpful?
    * Can we deconstruct historic data to understand what happens in population recruitment or reduction events?
    * Can we move toward a framework in which decisions are made based on what happened in previous life cycles?
* TWG members shared the following comments:
    * This would be an effective visualization tool and that making decisions within the context of life cycles was a valuable approach, but wondered if other TWG members would have concerns regarding the information used to inform stage transitions.
    * Thought using historical data to isolate bottlenecks was a valuable approach. This framework could be used as a predictive tool and as a means of supporting decision making.
* The Project Team agreed that developing a predictive tool or integrating into an existing predictive tool was important, as the goal is to manage Delta Smelt populations into the future.
* The Project Team observed that even if the group had perfect knowledge about a situation, at the present time they might not be able to agree on what actions to take. This tool could be useful for exploring well-understood hypothetical scenarios and discussing potential responses, which could help probe more uncertain situations encountered in reality.
* TWG members pointed out that there are several existing Delta Smelt life cycle models that integrate life cycle transitions and the probability of making those transitions. Members asked if it was possible for this project to build on existing work, or if this would have a more subjective approach based on expert opinions.
* The Project Team agreed that they want to build on existing work. However, the group does not have the time or resources to explore all existing conceptual models, which is why they will identify key areas of disagreement to help prioritize discussions.
* The Project Team noted that the Rose model was used in the Demo Project, and they assumed they would move forward with this tool, making modifications as needed. The Project Team wondered if the Rose model is capable of everything the group would like it to do and suggested the group discuss how to determine which of the existing models would be most appropriate for the analyses they want to do.
* A TWG member commented that disagreement over which model to use was a challenge in previous efforts. Using a quantitative life cycle model framework was advantageous over relying on expert opinions because it was reproducible.
* The Project Team agreed, and clarified that expert opinions are used to prioritize which conversations the group wants to have. The Project Team emphasized the importance of all TWG members sharing the same underlying conceptual model and assumptions as the project progresses. The Project Team will continue to coordinate with TWG members regarding the details of the holistic approach and what tools are available.

### Impact Pathway Prioritization
* The Project Team received feedback on the hypothesis screening spreadsheet since the first TWG meeting and they wanted to walk through those comments and refine the spreadsheet as a group.
* As a reminder, the Project Team envisions a three-step approach to the spreadsheet screening exercise.
    * List and rate first order hypotheses.
    * The Project Team is working with the TWG on getting the right set of hypotheses for each life stage. Once the hypotheses are complete, users are asked to rate how frequently a hypothesis is important for that life stage, when and where those circumstances occur, what lines of evidence exist, and how confident the member is in their line of thinking. Prior work has demonstrated that sharing evidence and level of confidence are particularly helpful for identifying areas of disagreement that require additional discussion.
    * Ask two important questions.
    * Based on the results of the ratings from step one, response to the following questions on a scale from one (very poor) to five (very good).
        * What is the potential for ADDITIONAL feasible management actions to mitigate this as a limiting factor?
        * What is the potential to learn more about pathway or related actions in ways that might be relevant to future decision making? (This is particularly relevant in instances where uncertainty is high because confidence is low.)
    * Determine which actions could theoretically mitigate each hypothesis.** Each impact pathway is rated on a scale from one (low) to five (high) for action feasibility and research priority. Future work will focus on highly feasible actions and key uncertainties.
* The Project Team noted that some of the comments received on the spreadsheet asked if the hypotheses were specific enough. The Project Team reminded the group that the intent is to address first-level impact pathways to determine the magnitude of the problem at a broader scale before identifying specific management actions that might affect a given pathway.
* The Project Team stated that four TWG members shared feedback on the spreadsheet, which they would review systematically for the group to discuss. 
* The TWG started by reviewing Member A’s input:
    * Member A explained that they thought the first two hypotheses applied to the transition from adult to larvae, and therefore should be placed into the larvae stage rather than adult. A TWG member commented that many researchers tend to think about transitions between life stages and it would be helpful to focus on the impacts to recruitment and transitions rather than life stages.
* The Project Team asked if the hypotheses should be organized by transition instead of life stage.
* A TWG member agreed, and observed this would align well with the visualizations of barriers to transitions and should help guide the group toward an end process of identifying bottlenecks and what contributes to bottlenecks rather than just what contributes to a life stage. Others agreed.
* The Project Team indicated they would update the spreadsheet accordingly, changing Column D from life stage to transition.
* Member A explained that they were uncertain of how to address direct versus indirect effects, as different models handle these differently.
* The Project Team responded that they recommended focusing on direct effects first and then delve into indirect effects later in the process.
* Member A agreed that approach made sense. They wanted to ensure that indirect effects would be examined at some point in the process. Member A then reviewed their additional comments.
    * Recommend deleting “The toxic effects of harmful algal blooms (HABs) has directly reduced growth and survival” for the adult stage, as this is not considered an issue for adults. Should be retained for other life stages, however.
    * Recommend adding “Reduced availability of high quality food has reduced growth and survival” for all life stages. Both the quantity and quality of food are important. Uncertain if there is quantitative data to demonstrate the importance of food quality, however.
    * Recommend deleting “Increased proximity to predators has increased predation” and revising “Increased numbers of predators have increased predation” to “Increased exposure to predators has increased predation” for all life stages as having both hypotheses seemed redundant.
* The Project Team agreed with the suggestion to combine the two predation hypotheses.
* The Project Team observed that several TWG members had made similar comments regarding HABs during the adult stage, and thought this was a straightforward change to make. The Project Team asked the group to weigh in on Member A’s suggested changes.
    * A TWG member contributed that adding a hypothesis about food quality made sense conceptually, but was not sure what data are currently available. The Project Team pointed out that the impact pathway prioritization process is designed to identify these sorts of uncertainties.
    * A TWG member commented that food quality data should exist, and referenced models of energy density for different prey species.
* The TWG agreed to incorporate food quality into the spreadsheet.
* The Project Team confirmed that TWG members were willing to accept Member A’s suggestions to combine the predation hypotheses and frame the single hypothesis as “exposure to predators” and remove the HAB hypothesis for the adult life stage.
* The TWG next reviewed Member B’s input:
    * Member B explained that they found it helpful to organize the hypotheses by time of year rather than growth stage. They pointed out that during the winter (i.e. for adults), growth is less important than fecundity, so they recommend deleting “growth” and inserting “fecundity” for all relevant hypotheses in the winter/adult life stage. 
    * A TWG member pointed out that adults do not need to eat, they need to grow to be fecund. Growth and fecundity are important, but survival is not. As subadults in the fall, the fish eat to store body fat. Once they transition to adults, their food is used to produce high-quality eggs.
    * A TWG member noted they disagreed on what defined a subadult.
    * A TWG member clarified that the food Delta Smelt eat from December to March is dedicated to growth during spawning, which makes them more fecund. Eating is not about survival at this time.
    * The Project Team asked if the all hypotheses should retain growth, survival, and fecundity, or if that was only appropriate for the winter/adult life stage.
    * A TWG member replied that it made sense to keep all three, and the Project Team suggested the phrasing, “growth, survival, and/or fecundity. The TWG agreed to incorporate this revision throughout the transition stage.
    * Member B asked if temperature was important for predation (in response to the hypothesis, “Decreased DS condition or temperature stress increases efficacy of predation”).
    * The Project Team clarified that the intent of this statement was to suggest higher temperatures could lead to low body conditions, and low body conditions might make Delta Smelt more susceptible to predation. They Project Team acknowledged that this statement may be trying to include too much content.
    * Member B commented that there had been interesting work done regarding how adult movement changes with higher temperatures, as they try to find cooler water. However, they would not expect temperature stress would increase predation problems during the winter.
    * The Project Team noted that this might be a statement that is lowly rated (i.e. occurring seldom or never).
    * Member B replied that temperature stress does not occur until temperatures go above 20 degrees Celsius, and that does not happen in winter.
    * The Project Team asked if others agreed that this should be deleted. Member B clarified that only the temperature portion should be removed.
    * A TWG member asked what “decreased body condition” meant. Member B suggested saying, “weaker” instead. A TWG member agreed that temperatures in December through March are never warm enough to cause decreased body condition or a stress response, so they suggested the entire statement could be removed.
    * A TWG member asked if extremely cold temperatures could affect survival or predation.
    * A TWG member commented that wintertime water temperatures of seven to eight degrees Celsius are common, and the fish seem fine in those conditions. The lower temperature limit probably has not be evaluated.
    * A TWG member noted that water temperature does play a role in the spawning window. Temperature may be important in the transition from eggs or larvae to adult, but not in predation. Changing temperatures in the spring do affect reproduction with regard to the spawning window, however.
    * The Project Team replied that, “High water temperatures have directly reduced survival” was intended to address the TWG member’s point. The Project Team suggested there are several ways predation is being affected. Turbidity is one way and proximity to predators is another. Is reduced state, whether by temperature, lack of food, or another mechanism, a primary cause of predation?
    * Member B suggested it might be a valid hypothesis only for summer.
    * A TWG member proposed keeping it in as a means to capture indirect effects of toxicity.
    * The group agreed to remove the reference to temperature, but will retain the rest of the statement.
    * A TWG member suggested the addition of conditional scoring that would capture problematic events such as HAB that only occur under certain conditions. They explained that it would be helpful to indicate if something was a constant stressor rather than a conditional stressor (e.g. temperature during a heat wave, or HABs during a drought).
    * The Project Team suggested that a user could indicate something happened only seldom (rating two out of five) in Column I, then explain what conditions are required in Column J.
    * The member thanked the Project Team for the clarification on how a scenario like a rare HAB could be captured using the existing scoring system, and noted that temperature might be a better example of something that can be both an acute and chronic stressor.
    * The Project Team acknowledged that both Members A and B suggested the HAB hypothesis be removed for the adult stage because they are so rarely a problem, and asked if the group wanted to revisit their earlier decision to remove this statement for the adult stage. TWG members agreed to leave it in for all life stages.
    * The Project Team suggested that they address a TWG member’s comment by adding a column that refers to chronic versus episodic occurrences. The Project Team asked the group if it was important to capture this, or if this was too detailed.
    * A TWG member felt the current spreadsheet scoring system was sufficient, with the possible exception of temperature, which could be both chronic and episodic.
    * Another TWG member commented that they liked the idea of capturing whether something was episodic or chronic. It makes sense to consider something that will be a significant stressor, even if only infrequently. They also pointed out that temperature was unlikely to be important in predation during the spring.
    * The group agreed to remove the reference to temperature stress associated with predation for the spring/larvae stage as well as winter/adult stage. The group noted that “High water temperatures have directly reduced survival” was also inappropriate for the larvae stage.
    * A TWG member also questioned the inclusion of, “The toxic effects of harmful algal blooms (HABs) has directly reduced growth and survival” for the spring/larvae stage, but acknowledged others may know more about the topic.
    * The Project Team noted that the example of information about algal blooms between March and May had been raised. A TWG member confirmed that in warmer and drier years, algae and other aquatic vegetation can start growing earlier in the year, but it does not happen often. The Project Team noted that they would leave this statement in the spreadsheet.
    * The Project Team observed that both Members A and B suggested inserting “and diversions” into “Water exports and diversions have increased entrainment mortality” for most life stages. The Project Team asked the group if they agreed, and if they knew when agricultural diversions occurred.
    * Member B replied that diversions occur primarily in the summer, and there are very few during the winter.
    * A TWG member asked if this statement referred to only south Delta exports, or any and all exports in the Delta.
    * The Project Team clarified that they are interested in any and all exports that could impact Delta Smelt.
    * A TWG member noted that there are exports in Cache Slough for municipal reasons, smaller riparian diverters throughout the Delta, as well as the large facility at Tracy (i.e. Jones Pumping Plant). “Water exports” is often used to refer to large exports in south Delta, but it would be helpful to clarify.
    * A TWG member suggested including both, but separating them into two different hypotheses because the effects and management decisions are likely different for exports and diversions. 
    * TWG members noted that diversions can vary depending on where they occur, how large they are, and what the tidal conditions are at the time and as a result the statement could be split into two hypotheses.
    * A TWG member pointed out that this might not matter for larvae. Of all the life stages, larvae are the least successfully screened.
    * A TWG member agreed but noted that few larvae are observed when monitoring behind screens. They concurred that it was useful to separate exports and diversions but reiterated that not all diversions are the same.
    * TWG members suggested that the group distinguish between large water projects and diversions instead of exports and diversions.
    * TWG members clarified that diversions are in-basin and exports are out-of-basin, but agreed with distinguishing by size.
    * The Project Team asked if large exports and small diversions would be appropriate, and if it was important to distinguish between exports and diversions.
    * A TWG member commented that maintaining the distinction is important because actions for exports and diversions would be very different.
    * TWG members suggested that the Project Team use one line for the Central Valley Project (CVP), one line for the State Water Project (SWP), and another line for everything else, as water movement for which account for quantities of water orders of magnitude smaller than those for the CVP and SWP.
    * The group discussed being more explicit and characterizing the three line as Banks Pumping Plant, Jones Pumping Plant, and everything else.
    * A TWG member recommended distinguishing between screened and unscreened diversions.
    * A member noted that juvenile fish could outswim small diversions.
    * A TWG member suggested existing Delta Smelt screening criteria could dictate the approach. All screened diversions have the same effect based on maximum pumping capacity. However, there is a significant difference between screened and unscreened diversions of the same size.
    * The group discussed that this might be too much detail to include at this initial stage, particularly since good information on which diversions are screened or not may not exist.
    * A TWG member replied that they might actually have good information regarding which diversions are screened or not. For instance, screening is not required by CDFW, so most agricultural diversions are not screened, unless the requirements have changed recently.
    * A TWG member noted that there was an effort to fund screening for all currently unscreened diversions. Currently, entities petitioning for new water rights must have them screened, but older ones are grandfathered in without screening. Some irrigation districts have sizable unscreened diversions.
    * A TWG member suggested that screened diversions are known, therefore all others are unscreened.
    * The group agreed to revise the spreadsheet to include three statements related to entrainment: exports from Banks and Jones Pumping Plants, unscreened diversions, and screened diversions.
    * The Project Team asked for feedback on Member B’s suggestion to include another hypothesis related to power plants.
    * Member B noted that when power plants were fully operating, they took in a lot of unscreened water, but that have not operated at full capacity for decades. Currently, they are only used occasionally to meet summer peaking requirements. Member B acknowledged they may not be relevant any longer.
    * The group agreed that if power plants were not a current pathway, it should not be included.
    The Project Team asked Member B to discuss their suggestion to add connectivity to habitat under the May to August/juvenile phase.
    * Member B explained that at certain times of the year, there will be a Delta Smelt population to the north in the Sacramento River and another in Suisun Marsh, while in summer and fall, the population is centered at the confluence of the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers. Member B wondered if a more connected population would increase the strength of the population.
    * The Project Team asked if the existing hypothesis, “Reduced availability of suitable rearing habitat conditions has reduced survival” was sufficient to cover this point. Could you argue that habitat is only available if it is connected?
    * Member B pointed out that, for example, it could be possible to have habitat available in the west and in the east that was unconnected. Additionally, in Cache Slough, particularly in the chute tunnel during periods of very high summer temperatures, fish have been observed to die if they have nowhere else to go (i.e. no connection to cooler habitat).
    * A TWG member commented that this was an important concept in this system, though they were not certain how it would fit into the matrix. Flows have a lot to do with connectivity, as salinity problems can occur as you move downstream. Habitats vary in high flow years, for instance, Suisun Bay will have lower temperatures and higher turbidity, making it more suitable for Delta Smelt. There are many factors to consider when thinking about habitat actions.
    * The Project Team referenced another hypothesis, “High water temperatures have directly reduced survival” and asked if that might capture the Cache Slough exampled Member B referenced, and then the relevant habitat pathway could be backed out from there. 
    * Member B replied that it would be worth keeping in to think about habitats that are engineered in a way that is not always connected and might not need management actions.
    * The Project Team asked which life stages should include the habitat connectivity hypothesis.
    * Member B suggested summer (May to August) and fall (August to November). The group agreed with this revision.
    * Member B asked for clarification about the following hypothesis, “Reduced availability of suitable rearing habitat conditions (LSZ) has reduced survival”. Member B wondered if this was referencing abiotic conditions, as subsequent hypotheses address food and predation.
    * The Project Team observed that Member A had commented on this as well, suggesting that the reference to the low salinity zone (LSZ) should be removed if the statement was meant be broader.
    * A TWG member noted their assumption that this statement was referring only to stationary habitat, and asked if they should also include water quality. Rearing and spawning habitat also included salinity. They agreed with the suggestion to remove LSZ, and recommended splitting the statement into two, one for stationary habitat, and one for water quality, as these two factors would be managed differently.
    * The group agreed to clarify that this was referring to abiotic habitat conditions, and split into two. One would refer to stationary elements and the other two factors that fluctuate over time and under different conditions.
    * The group discussed that salinity and turbidity might be the only variable factors, as temperature and contaminants are addressed elsewhere.
    * A TWG members asked if this statement was specific to rearing habitats, or all habitat types.
    * The Project Team clarified they would make this revision for all life stages and TWG members noted that for adults it should reference spawning habitat rather than rearing habitat.
    * Member B noted that entrainment of juveniles is typically finished by July and entrainment of adults typically follows the first flush, which usually occurs no earlier than December. Member B did not see entrainment as an important issue between August and November and wondered if it should be removed for this time period.
    * The Project Team pointed out that a user could rate entrainment as never occurring during that stage.
    * Member B acknowledged that now that entrainment was being split into three separate hypotheses, diversions could have an impact, so it made sense to leave it in.
    * Member B asked if the follow-up questions (Columns J through M) captured spatial information, i.e. noting if something was a Delta-wide problem, or specific to particular regions. They thought it would be helpful to think about problems spatially.
    * The Project Team asked if the second question (Column J, “What circumstances lead to this pathway becoming particularly problematic?”) might get at this information, and wondered if each spatial area might have a different response to Column I (“How often is this pathway an important factor limited Delta Smelt?”).
    * Member B replied that they did not think a change was needed at this time, and the group would likely address spatial questions when they discussed the influence diagrams.
    * The Project Team agreed to think about ways they might incorporate spatial information.
    * The Project Team asked if Column I (“How often is this pathway an important factor limited Delta Smelt?”) will be sufficient for the group to discriminate between those pathways they want to focus on and those with reduced focus, or if there might be another question or a rewording of this question that would be more helpful.
    * Member B commented that an event could occur annually, but if it has a small impact, it would not be worth focusing on. However, less frequent events with large impact would be worth looking into. Member B wondered if Column I would capture the severity of a stressor.
    * The Project Team suggested they could add another column for severity (retaining Column I’s focus on frequency), or add an additional dropdown options that combined severity and frequency instead, such as severe and frequent or severe and infrequent.
    * Member B suggested reducing the number of frequency options from five to three (frequently, infrequently, never) if combining severity and frequency. TWG members agreed that a combination of severity and frequency would provide important context. The Project Team agreed to come back to the group with a suggestion for how to incorporate severity; perhaps selecting from a matrix of high, medium, or low severity by high, medium, or low frequency (nine options in total). 
* Next, the TWG reviewed Member C’s comments.
    * Member C recommended that the hypothesis, “High water temperatures have directly reduced survival” for the larvae stage reference growth in addition to survival, as water temperatures directly influence larval growth.
    * The group agreed to update this language. The Project Team confirmed they would revise the hypothesis screening spreadsheet based on the feedback and discussion from this meeting and they may follow-up with TWG members over the coming weeks with specific questions.
* The Project Team asked Member D to reflect on the comments they shared via email prior to the meeting.
    * Member D stated that they had a better sense of how everything fit together after today’s discussion. They commented that it seemed strange no one had mentioned the concept of flow at any point in this discussion when the Delta is a flow-driven system. Member D also referenced work by Bill Bennett and Peter Moyle that points to the importance of the juvenile life stage.
* The Project Team walked through Member D’s written comments and how the Project Team thought they related to the impact pathways approach.
    * Several of the points Member D raised overlap with hypotheses that will be screened in this exercise, and several other will be addressed through the holistic/scenarios approach.
    * The impact pathways approach is designed to capture references and data sources, such as those cited in Member D’s comments.
    * The final step of the impact pathways exercise will look at potential management actions, and that is when the discussion of flow (as a potential action) will be critical.
    * Member D commented that if they need to think about flow and its severity and frequency, they should do so in a highly organized way that acknowledges flow as a primary driver of the system. Member D also pointed out that more is known about some life stages than others and encouraged the group to look closely at the juvenile bottleneck.
* The Project Team noted that flow is something that affects many of the first-level issues captured in the spreadsheet (e.g. habitat, food, predation, toxicity), but the impact pathway approach starts with these first-level issues and then moves to thinking about tools that can address those problems. Flow is a primary tool in that toolkit, and reiterated that it will come into the process at a later stage.
* The Project Team stated that they would not have time to discuss analysis tools during this meeting, but would add it to the agenda for TWG Meeting #3.

### Update on Document Sharing
TWG members were presented with two project websites developed for similar efforts, the Central Valley Project Improvement Act (CVPIA) SDM process (http://cvpia.scienceintegrationteam.com/) and the Delta SDM process (http://delta.scienceintegrationteam.com/). The key sections and features of these websites include:    
1.  An **about** page that contains background information and foundational documents.
2.  A **project calendar** that tracks meeting dates and syncs to team members’ calendars to automatically provide updates.     
3. A **searchable archive** of meeting notes and documents.     
4. A **tools** page that tracks documentation, data sources, and code for models.       
5.  TWG members agreed that these platforms seemed promising as a means of housing and tracking information. The Project Team is currently discussing document sharing options and will update TWG members once a document sharing platform is in place.        

### Next Steps and Work Planning
The Project Team reviewed the planned TWG meetings through the end of 2019.             
1. **November 8**, 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. An in-person option will be available. Agenda topics may include reviewing results of step one of the impact pathways approach and discussion analysis tools.        
2. **November 22**, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Full day, in-person      workshop. Likely focused on the holistic/scenarios approach.        
3. **December 6**, 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. Webinar. Agenda topics TBD.      
4. **December 20**, 9:00 to 11:00 a.m. Webinar. Agenda topics TBD.    

The Project Team thanked the TWG members for their participation and adjourned the meeting.       

