+++
title = "Conference Call"

date = 2018-12-05T13:51:56-08:00
# lastmod = 2018-09-09T00:00:00

draft = false  # Is this a draft? true/false
toc = true  # Show table of contents? true/false
type = "docs"  # Do not modify.

# Add menu entry to sidebar.
linktitle = "December 06, 2019 (conference call)"
[menu.meetings]
  parent = "Delta SIT"
  weight = 974
+++

## Technical Working Group Meeting 4

## Participants

### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Bill Bennett, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment and Center for Watershed Sciences
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Deanna Sereno, Contra Costa Water District
* Will Smith, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Kate Spear, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)


### Project Team
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Nora De Cuir, Kearns & West 
* Graham Long, Compass Resource Management
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management


## Action Items
* Lauren to share 2017 draft report by Steve Slater with TWG members.
* Lauren to share references from presentation with Compass team.
* Compass to build out the conceptual model for spawning/fecundity.
* Project Team to coordinate with Bill Bennett on a juvenile to subadult transition presentation at a future TWG meeting.
* Project Team and TWG members to share resources and expert speaker ideas for remaining priority topics.
* Project Team to confirm 2020 meeting dates through March.


## Key Agreements or Outcomes 
TWG members agreed to develop conceptual models as a means of documenting and tracking lines of evidence. TWG members supported exploring a limiting factors analysis as part of the scenarios-based approach.

## Introductions
The Project Team reviewed the agenda and TWG members introduced themselves. 

## Working Group Discussion - Spawning

*Presentation on Spawning and Fecundity*

Lauren Damon (IEP) shared an overview of delta smelt spawning and fecundity.

* Lauren pointed TWG members to a 2016 paper she co-authored (Fecundity and reproductive potential of wild female delta smelt in the upper San Francisco Estuary, California) as an additional reference.
* Delta smelt surveyed through the Spring Kodiak Trawl Survey are dissected in the field and gender and gonadal development status is noted. This data is used to develop fecundity information. Fork length can also be used to estimate fecundity.
    * When they exist, larger females contribute more to the population.
* Delta smelt spawning season typically begins in February or March and ends in May. In culture, delta smelt averaged 50 days between clutches. There is likely greater variability in the spawning interval in wild populations.
    * When delta smelt are detectable in the field, the start of the spawning window is determined by the first observation of spent females and the end by the last newly hatched fish.
    * Temperature can be used to calculate the spawning window when observational data is not available.
* Lauren introduced a conceptual model for fecundity that can be summarized by the following relationships.
    * Annual population fecundity = Σ(clutch fecundity) x spawning frequency
    * Annual fecundity ≈ egg production
* Population growth can occur if delta smelt have an adequate number of spawns in a year. The number of spawns needed to produce the desired population growth can be calculated based on the abundance of adults.
* Truncated spawning windows have a significant negative effect on population growth.


*Discussion on Spawning and Fecundity*

A TWG member asked if females needed to have access to high-quality food all year in order to produce good eggs.

* Lauren replied that growth rate data from otoliths might be able to address this. Unpublished data from a starvation survey of cultured delta smelt indicated that fish could recover from a couple of weeks of starvation.
* A TWG member shared that preliminary results from the USFWS lifecycle model suggest food is more important to winter survival than previously perceived.
* Lauren noted that the conceptual model she shared indicates female size, temperature, and food all relate to fecundity and the spawning window.


A TWG member asked if female size was as important a determinant of the number of eggs produced as female nutritional health.

* Lauren agreed this would be worth exploring. The preservation method used when the egg count data was collected prevented the same specimen whose eggs were counted from also being submitted for histopathology. TWG members acknowledged that new preservation techniques have been developed since then that would allow a broad suite of analyses to be completed on the same fish, which would be the ideal approach going forward.

A TWG member suggested using temperature to estimate the spawning window for the years before the Spring Kodiak Trawl Survey was initiated (i.e. prior to 2002). The TWG member also asked if lunar cycles were an important factor in spawning.

* Lauren replied that surveys have not been aligned with the lunar cycle so it is difficult to draw conclusions from existing data.


*Discuss Template to Document Next Steps*


The Project Team suggested using Lauren’s conceptual model as an example for how to approach documenting lines of evidence for each hypothesis at each life stage. 

* TWG members agreed to this approach. 
* The Project Team will begin with the adult to larvae transition by working with the conceptual model from Lauren’s presentation. 
* Along the way, the Project Team, in collaboration with TWG members, will gather evidence, identify potential management actions and uncertainties around their effectiveness, characterize potential trade-offs with other objectives, and define modeling methods.

The group discussed whether the Allee effect should be included in the conceptual model. 

* TWG members agreed the Allee effect was unlikely to be important for delta smelt, although the related hypothesis Number of Reproductive Adults should still be accounted for in the conceptual model moving forward.

## Working Group Discussion – Scenario Approach

*Update on Scenario-Based/Limiting Factors Approach*


The Project Team shared a proposed framework for identifying limiting factors. 

* This approach resulted from discussions about a decision support system during the previous TWG meeting and a subsequent follow-up call with TWG members. 
* The proposed limiting factors approach provides a way to examine candidate management actions for a variety of potential scenarios. 
* In situations where several different factors may be limiting delta smelt populations, identifying the controlling factor will help determine the most effective management action(s).
* TWG members agreed this approach was worth pursuing, but observed that it could be difficult to determine which limiting factor was the controlling factor.
* TWG members emphasized the importance of considering outflows, both as a management action, and as a natural part of the Delta environment. 
    * The Project Team agreed, noting they anticipate outflows to be a candidate management action for many scenarios and that natural conditions are the first thing that should be considered in the limiting factors approach.


The Project Team outlined a potential vision for a recovery strategy and implementation plan that includes the following:

* Long-term, ongoing management actions,
* In-year, conditional management actions,
* Decision support system to help identify conditional management actions, and
* Identifying key uncertainties and research priorities.
 

TWG members indicated their support for further developing this approach toward an eventual strategy/implementation plan.
 
## Next Steps and Work Planning

*Upcoming Meetings*

* The Project Team asked TWG members for recommended resources and experts on the remaining priority topics and agreed to coordinate on these items over email. 
* The next meeting will be a webinar on Friday, December 20 from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. The meeting will slightly shorter to accommodate a Steering Committee call. The focus of the meeting will be confirmed once an expert speaker is identified.
