+++
title = "In-Person Meeting"

date = 2018-12-05T13:51:56-08:00
# lastmod = 2018-09-09T00:00:00

draft = false  # Is this a draft? true/false
toc = true  # Show table of contents? true/false
type = "docs"  # Do not modify.

# Add menu entry to sidebar.
linktitle = "December 20, 2019 (in-person)"
[menu.meetings]
  parent = "Delta SIT"
  weight = 973
+++


## Participants


### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuña, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Erin Cole, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP)
* Scott Hamilton, Coalition for a Sustainable Delta
* Sam Luoma, UC Davis, John Muir Institute of the Environment
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Kate Spear, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)

### Project Team
* Nora De Cuir, Kearns & West 
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Dan Ohlson, Compass Resource Management

### Guest Presenter
* Steve Slater, California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW)


## Action Items
* Project Team to share Steve Slater’s presentation with TWG. 
* Larry Brown to share important papers and examples of previous conceptual models of food production with Compass.
* Randy Mager to look into the Roaring River Action and identify any monitoring information that is available to share with the group.
* TWG members to provide feedback to Compass on approach to Feb 10 Modeling Discussion (in person workshop).
* TWG members to provide feedback to Compass on additional experts to give presentations. 
* Compass to update table of topics/experts to include Lauren Damon.
* Compass to gather lines of evidence from Steve’s presentation.
    * Many documents are available on ResearchGate; TWG members may be able to share others.
    * Compass will follow up with Steve for any missing references.
* All to consider how to deal with analysis of food in modeling (i.e. how sensitive is model to changes in carbon; need to pin down carbon estimates).


## Key Agreements or Outcomes 
TWG members identified several data gaps related to food, including carbon values for prey as well as a lack of information on larval fish and amphipod populations. Closing these gaps could improve the ability to model food quality and availability.


## Introductions
The Project Team reviewed the agenda and noted this meeting would be slightly shorter to accommodate a Steering Committee call.


## Working Group Discussion
*Presentation on Delta Smelt Food and Prey Availability*

Steve Slater (CDFW) shared an overview of delta smelt diet studies to date. Most of this information is included in the FLOAT DOP report.

* There has been a major change over time in Delta Smelt food and prey availability.
* Delta smelt diet and prey availability vary by season and salinity.
* Delta smelt diet does not vary significantly from year to year.
* As delta smelt grow larger, the number and size of prey also increases.
* Delta smelt select for adult Pseudodiaptomus forbesi and against juvenile P. forbesi. 
    * This pattern likely applies to other prey species. 

*Discussion of Delta Smelt Food and Prey Availability*

The group discussed how prey and food quality are addressed in the Rose model.

* TWG members noted the Rose model does not currently include amphipods or larval fish. Steve acknowledged both would be worth including, but there are currently data gaps for both prey types.
* TWG members pointed out that the model does not distinguish Pseudodiaptomus by life stage and wondered if it would be better to differentiate between life stages given the information Steve shared regarding delta smelt prey selectivity.
* TWG members remarked that although the Rose model uses carbon content to estimate nutritional value, carbon estimates are often imprecise and not specific to the Delta.
* Moving forward, TWG members suggested clarifying how food quality is evaluated for use in the Rose model. If carbon is used, and the model is highly sensitive to carbon, then it will be important to obtain more accurate carbon values. Next steps could include: verifying carbon data, documenting caveats, and sensitivity tests. Key references include DOP and FLOAT-MAST.


TWG members observed that there may not be sufficient data to address the food accessibility impact mechanism through this process. Steve suggested that 20 mm summer townet survey data may provide provisional information to begin tackling accessibility.


A TWG member asked which species of larval fish delta smelt might feed on and if there are any surveys that track larval fish.

* Steve replied that delta smelt primarily feed on larval prickly sculpin and Pacific herring. There are some larval fish surveys that cover January through March and March through July, but none that sample during the end of the year.
* A TWG member noted that spawning habitat is the key factor that determines which larval fish end up as delta smelt prey.


The Project Team asked if the group had any additional thoughts or changes to their previous rankings of food quantity, quality, and accessibility as a high priority issue food visibility as a low priority issue given Steve’s presentation and subsequent discussion. 

* Steve commented that while food was important for all life stages, food limitation was more likely during the summer and fall than winter and early spring.
* A TWG member agreed, pointing to the spring/summer bottleneck during which there is high demand for food, but limited availability of high-quality food.
* A TWG member asked if limited food availability during the spring/summer bottleneck is also reflected in gut fullness data.
    * The group discussed calculating the mass of prey needed per delta smelt based on a range of delta smelt body mass percentages that could correspond to gut fullness.
* A TWG member shared preliminary modeling results from USFWS that indicate a potential relationship between food and delta smelt survival, particularly in March.


A TWG member asked if food limitation could vary with water year. Steve remarked that the mechanisms for food limitation are not yet well understood. The group discussed several factors that could influence production (flow, temperatures, salinity) and agreed this was a complex and multivariable relationship.


The Project Team asked the group if any reports or other key references include conceptual models related to food. The following resources were suggested:

* Wim Kimmerer’s work on food webs for primary production and zooplankton production,
* A large team has previously worked toward putting together a model on primary productivity, and
* Several previous efforts put toward conceptual models could be used as building blocks, although many are not fish centric.


The Project Team asked the group about potential management actions that might be beneficial for food. The following management actions were suggested:

* Suisun Marsh salinity control gates (accessibility) (complete with monitoring report),
* North Delta food web action (accessibility) (complete with monitoring report),
* Habitat restoration, particularly in tidal marshes,
    * Some TWG members noted the benefits of tidal marsh expansion are not necessarily well-established for delta smelt, or may be indirect
* Pulse flows,
* Coordination with managed marshes with duck clubs,
* Roaring River action, and
* Increased freshwater delivery to Suisun Bay in the fall (in years with the appropriate temperature distribution)


The Project Team asked if the USFWS lifecycle model would be one of the tools the group will use to examine food-related mechanisms. TWG members agreed that it may be, but highlighted that the bioenergetics model and likely other models and analysis methods might be useful as well.


## Next Steps and Work Planning

*Upcoming Meetings*

* Meetings have been scheduled through the end of March 2020.
    * The next meeting will be a webinar on Friday, January 10 from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
    * The next full day, in-person session will be Monday, February 10 and will be focused on modeling.
* The Project Team and TWG members are working to identify experts to give presentation on the remaining priority topics.
