+++
title = "In-Person Meeting"

date = 2018-12-05T13:51:56-08:00
# lastmod = 2018-09-09T00:00:00

draft = false  # Is this a draft? true/false
toc = true  # Show table of contents? true/false
type = "docs"  # Do not modify.

# Add menu entry to sidebar.
linktitle = "October 04, 2019 (in-person)"
[menu.meetings]
  parent = "Delta SIT"
  weight = 978
+++

## October 04, 2019

## Technical Working Group Meeting 1

## Participants
### Technical Working Group
* Shawn Acuna, Metropolitan Water District (MWD)
* Mike Beakes, United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR)
* Larry Brown, United States Geological Survey (USGS)
* Lauren Damon, Interagency Ecological Program (IEP) * Mike Eakin, California Department of Fish & Wildlife (DFW)
* Ben Geske, Delta Science Program (DSP)
* Scott Hamilton, Public Water Agencies (PWA)
* Li-Ming He, United States Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS)
* Randall Mager, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)
* Ted Sommer, California Department of Water Resources (DWR)

### Project Team
* Nora De Cuir, Kearns & West 
* Mary Beth Day, Kearns & West
* Dan Ohlson, Compass
* Graham Long, Compass 
* Bruce DiGennaro, The Essex Partnership


## Action Items
* Compass to schedule a follow-up meeting with Lauren to discuss developing a holistic scenario-based approach for the group to consider. (COMPLETE)
* Compass/the Project Team will develop a project calendar and set of dates and share with the group. (COMPLETE)
* Compass will email the PowerPoint presentation to the group. (COMPLETE)
* Compass will share the spreadsheet with the group after follow-up phone calls and editing. (COMPLETE)
* Project Team will discuss the process for document sharing, housing, and version control, and propose a method at the next meeting. (IN PROGRESS)


## Key Agreements or Outcomes 
TWG members demonstrated a willingness to work with the approach to the next phase of work presented by the Compass team. The group was open to collaborating on refinement of the spreadsheet presented by Compass. TWG members raised questions about the possibility of using scenario planning in this process, how to account for episodic events, how to balance urgency with scientific rigor and discussed the need to coordinate this process with other Structured Decision Making (SDM) processes in the Delta. The group agreed to proceed with the proposed meeting frequency and overall project schedule. 


## Introduction and Roles
The Project Team reviewed the agenda, the TWG roster, and provided an outline of project team roles as follows:   

* Kearns & West will provide facilitation and process coordination,   
* Compass will provide structured decision making     
* The Essex Partnership will provide coordination with CSAMP/CAMT and project resourcing, and   
* FlowWest will provide technical support and analysis.       


## Overview and Discussion of Proposed Approach to Current Phase of Work
The Project Team presented previous processes related to this current phase of structured decision making, including: 

* CSAMP SDM Demo Project    
* Scoping Project         
* Delta-wide Rapid Prototyping Project (Peterson, et al.).    


## CSAMP SDM Demo Project
The Project Team presented the details of the CSAMP SDM Demo Project.

* This project took place between June 2017 and May 2018. CSAMP invited Compass to work on the project and Bruce DiGennaro (The Essex Partnership) coordinated between parties. Compass’ SDM Process involves six steps, which the Project Team reviewed in the context of the CSAMP SDM Demo Project:
* Clarify the Decision Context: Focuses project scope on a specific question, which helps to determine project objectives and alternatives. In this case, which Delta Smelt Resiliency Strategy (RS) actions should be prioritized over the next few years? Ted Sommer (DWR), Scott Hamilton (CSD), Shawn Acuña (MWD), Pat Coulston (DFW), and Will Smith (FWS) were all involved in this process. 
* Define Objectives and Measures: Asks what the important considerations are in the decision context, in this case what are the important considerations when prioritizing RS actions? Delta Smelt is the key consideration, but there are additional ecological, socio-economic, and resource considerations that make this a multiple-objective problem.  
* Develop Alternatives: Alternatives development involves considering the logical pathways that connect actions to project objectives. In this case, the project looked at 13 actions from the Delta Smelt Resiliency Strategy document developed by the State in consultation with fisheries agencies. SDM helped determine which actions to carry forward under other funding sources. 
* Estimate Consequences: For each action, a pathway or flowchart is developed to estimate the effects of a particular action. In this case, this required the need to judge effects on species other than the Delta Smelt, on factors like navigation and recreation. To address these, Compass developed a rating scale to estimate consequences. Will (FWS) worked with the Delta Smelt Bio-energetics model (Rose et al., 2013) to estimate consequences for Delta Smelt. Compass developed a consequence table to show the estimated magnitude of the effects of each of the 13 actions on each Decision Objective. The table also included the uncertainty associated with each of the actions.
* Evaluate Trade-Offs and Select (Prioritize): With the consequence table, the TWG was able to prioritize actions, and develop a list of those that should continue as planned, those that required further investigation, and those that should be reconsidered. 


The Demo project illustrated that the SDM process can be useful and productive. CSAMP then asked Compass to scope out a ‘real’ Delta Smelt SDM process. 


## Scoping Project
The Project Team presented details of the Scoping Project that followed the Demo Project:

* Following the SDM Demo Project, the Compass team was asked to scope out a ‘real’ SDM process for the Delta Smelt. They conducted a survey among CSAMP organizations that asked:
* Is there a specific decision related to Delta Smelt that your organization thinks CSAMP would be well placed to inform with a collaborative decision process?
* Why do you think a process around this decision or question would be useful?
* What is your organization interested in achieving through a Delta Smelt structured decision process?
* They then held a workshop to work through lines of questions and determine project scope. The workshop defined three levels of scope:
* Water only
* All stressors
* Overall population growth
* During the workshop, four possible scope options emerged:
* Long-term AM Strategy to recover multiple species + Effects Analysis
* Long-term AM Strategy to recover Delta Smelt (with consideration of other species) + Effect Analysis
* RS Focus – Further investigate and prioritize existing actions in RS
* How to best use water and project operations in given types of years?


A TWG member asked for clarification of what was meant by the second scope option, Long-term AM Strategy to recover Delta Smelt (with consideration of other species)    

*  Effect Analysis.
  * The Project Team answered that this dealt with consolidating what science is known around different pathway diagrams and different relationships between stressors and fish biology. The goal is to first consider what is known about biological stressors and limits, and then work to determine effective actions. 
  * The TWG member asked that moving forward, this terminology be rephrased, since the term “effects analysis” has a very specific meaning for those in the regulatory arena.


The Project Team continued the presentation on the Scoping Project: 

* The outcome of the Scoping Project showed support for further development of Option 2, Long term Adaptive Management Strategy for Delta Smelt recovery with Effects Analysis, and consideration of other species. The result was two main points of direction:
  * A focus on Delta Smelt but with some analysis on other species and ecosystem impacts
  * Implement actions, but also broaden scope of investigation of biology and actions that might help meet biological needs.
  * CSAMP then asked Compass to develop a Proposal for an SDM process, working with The Essex Partnership, CAMT, DSST, and others. 


A TWG member added that the Scoping project delayed decisions on several questions that might be more appropriate to address with this project.

Delta-wide Rapid Prototyping Project, Peterson et al.


## The Project Team presented details of the Delta-wide Rapid Prototyping Project, Peterson et al:

* This project was sponsored by the Delta Science Program and USBR. It focused on annual decisions related to the Central Valley Project. This project and the Scoping Project used similar methodologies and had other parallels. There could therefore be opportunities to collaborate and integrate, for example:        
  * Sharing of the detailed objectives and hypotheses assessed    
  * Use a similar suite of candidate management actions under both processes    
  * Leverage each other’s analytical methods to estimate consequences and populate consequence tables   
* A TWG member commented that there were two models for Delta Smelt endpoints, that Scott helped develop these, and that the geographic scope was much greater for salmon, as compared to Delta Smelt.    
* A TWG member clarified that the decision maker for the Rapid Prototyping Project was USBR and that USBR asked the TWG member’s team with the Delta Science Program to reach out to other groups. USBR would help them decide how to spend limited resources on the possible science actions from the Bay-Delta office. At the start there were 42 management actions, which were narrowed down to the 13 shown in the consequence tables.     
* A TWG member commented that Jim Peterson was involved in the Rapid Prototyping Project because he is leading CVPIA through a similar process. They want the SDM processes to be compatible.     
* The Project Team commented that as far as they were aware, the Rapid Prototyping Project was not moving forward to Phase 2.     
* A TWG member confirmed that the Rapid Prototyping Project has concluded, but the information from that project might be incorporated into the ongoing CVPIA efforts.    
* The Project Team commented that, because the Rapid Prototyping Project is not moving beyond prototype, it was not necessary to consider integrating that effort into the current project in the near term. They suggested first considering integrating with the CVPIA effort and impacts on salmon.    
* The Project Team explained that Compass was asked to write a proposal for an SDM process while the Rapid Prototyping Project was still underway, and was asked to consider how to integrate the two. For example, different modeling approaches may have been expanded, or there could be tools, information, and analyses to leverage from other efforts. The Project Team asked TWG members to consider if there are opportunities to collaborate and integrate with other projects moving forward, and if there are actions that multiple projects could be looking at.    


## Current Project—Phase 1: Project Initiation

The Project Team presented details of Phase 1 of the Current SDM Project.    

* Phase 1: Project Initiation involves three steps:   
  * Set up the SDM Steering Committee   
  * Set up the Technical Working Group    
  * Development & Approval of Process Guidelines    


## Proposed Approach to Initial TWG Efforts


The Project Team presented the proposed approach to initial TWG efforts:

* The next year or so of the project would comprise Phase 2 of the project, and involve the TWG conducting a deep dive into the Delta Smelt components of the SDM Process.
* The SDM Steering Committee has already started work on developing a goal statement, which is moving towards approval by the CSAMP Policy Committee. The current goal statement reads: 
* Reverse the trajectory of the Delta Smelt population from one in decline to one experiencing sustained increases within 5-10 generations. 
* To achieve this goal CSAMP members will work collaboratively and with urgency to prioritize and implement management actions that are targeted at known or hypothesized bottlenecks to the Delta Smelt population and to learn through implementation.
* The TWG should use this statement as a guide going forward.
* There is a need to balance thoroughness and scientific rigor with speed of action.
* Phase 3 of the project will include all objectives for the project, not limited to the Delta Smelt objectives as in Phase 2. 
* Phase 2 will focus on steps 2, 3, and 4 of the SDM Process, with a focus on Delta Smelt-related components: defining Objectives and Measures, developing Candidate Alternatives, and developing Consequence Estimation methods. 


* A TWG member commented that, for any tool that the TWG proposes, there are many ways that such a tool could be developed. The member asked how the group should approach this challenge and provided the example that there are many alternatives for testing flow and it is difficult to come to consensus on the right magnitude and season of flow to test. 
* The Project Team agreed that this would be difficult and suggested that the TWG begin by addressing questions like this. The Project Team referred to the process diagrams (slide 13 of the presentation) and posed the question of where to begin with respect to the diagram. They suggested starting on the right side of the diagram, which deals with Delta Smelt “pinch points,” or what the Delta Smelt fundamentally need, and working left on the diagram towards what alternative could effectively address these “pinch points.”
* A TWG member commented that the approach the Project Team outlined would help to screen out and develop general categories of alternatives, but that with any one tool there would still be a wide range of potential options. How to narrow down to a single option would be a difficult question. 
* A TWG member commented that the CVPIA SDM process was helpful to consider, and included a robust analysis to systematically evaluate the effects of assumptions for a range of alternatives. The member explained that certain assumptions impact what decision is optimal, and they hoped the analytical framework the TWG develops will have flexibility to consider assumptions in this way. 
* A TWG member commented that if the goal of the project is to reverse the trajectory of Delta Smelt populations, which is different than management actions to avoid extinction that would provide boundaries on what to test with respect to flow actions. The member continued to say that if management actions were taken as mitigation for project effects, the TWG would need to address questions of how to achieve a reverse of population trajectory. 
* The Project Team commented that the examples from the TWG member were good examples of opportunities to leverage work the work of the CVPIA process. The Project Team reminded the group that it will be difficult to focus on candidate actions and analytical methods. They asked TWG members to let the Project Team know if they think the Project Team should take a different approach to this project.


The Project Team resumed the presentation of the Current Project:

* At a high level, decision objectives and measures for Delta Smelt could include maximizing growth rate and minimizing probability of extinction in the short term. The TWG should define these objectives, but first it would be useful to develop a conceptual model of the Delta Smelt. 
* Several such conceptual models have already been developed, and each can provide insights, inform which Delta Smelt lifecycle stages are of most interest for this project, and inform quantitative modeling. 
* Ideally, the TWG will agree on a conceptual model to start with and determine which aspects of the model would be most fruitful to explore.
* The selection of a conceptual model again brings in the need to balance scientific rigor with expediency. It might be difficult for the group to select a universally acceptable conceptual model. 
* As a starting point, the Project Team proposes focusing on basic impact mechanisms and hypotheses around potential key stressors and limits for Delta Smelt, then developing screening questions around these mechanisms to determine which objectives are most critical at each Delta Smelt life stage. 
* The Project Team feels it is important to first seek agreement on which aspects of Delta Smelt biology are most important to address, and only then consider specific actions to address those aspects. This will focus the project on actions that are most important rather than those that are most feasible. 
* The Project Team emphasized that TWG members should push back on these ideas if they disagreed. 
* The general draft approach that the Project Team has taken so far has involved identifying basic pathways and hypotheses that are common to many conceptual models and attempting to balance specificity and generality. 
* The Project Team recognizes that not all of the pathways and hypotheses identified are correct, and hopes to work with the TWG to build a collective set of pathways and hypotheses. 
* A TWG member commented that establishing a list of priorities risks screening out Delta Smelt stressors that are episodically important. They also emphasized the need to consider feasibility when determining what factors of Delta Smelt biology should be addressed. The member’s main points are summarized as follows:
  * Current understanding of Delta Smelt stressors is situational and needs to be approached carefully. There are many important factors in Delta Smelt biology that could wipe out the Delta Smelt, but any of these factors may only occur every three to five years. 
  * It is important to consider the time element and overall risks of this project. Actions should not be upfront in the planning process, but there is a need to consider feasibility. For example, temperature may be an important stressor in Delta Smelt biology, but the “toolbox” to address temperature is limited.
  * Even if temperature is not feasible to address in this project, the effects of temperature on Delta Smelt should still be considered throughout the decision-making process. 
  * One option could be to develop a category for stressors that are important but not currently feasible. 
  * The most important stressors affecting Delta Smelt are dependent on the timescales being considered. Generating a list of important stressors must be done carefully and should not be taken out of context.
  * Show associated risk for low-probability stressors and include these in risk analysis.
  The Project Team presented a plan for the next several TWG meetings along with a spreadsheet that details current understanding of factors in Delta Smelt biology.
  * The first sheet includes a list of potential mechanisms affecting Delta Smelt populations by life stage. 
  * Mechanisms are focused on the factors that affect Delta Smelt populations not their underlying causes, i.e. the right-hand side of the process diagrams, not the left. 
  * The general idea is to develop a list of hypotheses for these mechanisms, then ask experts how important each mechanism is for Delta Smelt populations during different year types, e.g. wet, average, and dry years. Experts could include both TWG members and external experts. 
  * Responses to these questions will be coded into the spreadsheet and used to determine areas of agreement and disagreement. 
  * After gathering responses, the TWG should take time to discuss findings, and consider limitations.
  * Mechanisms could be screened by adding filters to the spreadsheet to distinguish which are technically and economically feasible, and which mechanisms could benefit from further research. 
  * A weighted function would be used to determine which pathways are important to address. The function would include influence, feasibility, and action priority, among other factors. 
  * After determining which pathways are important, the TWG could begin considering actions for those pathways and the uncertainties associated with those actions. 
  * This proposed process aims to avoid pursuing pathways that are less important for achieving project goals.
  * It could be useful to add a category in the spreadsheet that tracks strength/quality of evidence to support mechanism effects. 
  * There should be a way to track and consider both management and research priorities. Mechanisms with high uncertainty could benefit from research even if there is currently low action feasibility.
* A TWG member commented that they supported including “learning opportunity” as a criteria for action.
* A TWG member asked, referring to the drop down menu is step 1, how different lines of evidence will be weighted.
  * The Project Team responded that ideally the TWG would be able to discuss as a group available evidence for each mechanism, but this is not feasible in the available time. They suggested that Delta Smelt experts filling in the spreadsheet might be able to quickly screen out something when there is agreement that it is not important. When there is disagreement the group can discuss those lines of evidence further.
  * The TWG member responded that technical discussions that have already happened reached an impasse. The member asked what would happen in the current project if an impasse still exists.
  * The Project Team responded that there were several options in the face of an impasse:
  + Move a hypothesis forward as potentially important
  + Flag as an opportunity for further research
  + Move forward with multiple hypotheses and flag as an opportunity for further research, so that future iterations could revisit competing hypotheses. 
  * The TWG member responded that the Project Team’s answer was rational but that they still had concerns.
  * The Project Team responded that the Project Team did not believe it had all of the answers to these questions, but that they wanted to create a foundational structure to organize the knowledge of the TWG and to build that structure over time. 
* A TWG member voiced concern about episodic events, such as heat waves or contaminants that are not related to water years, and asked whether the spreadsheet could include a method for considering such events. 
  * The Project Team responded that the Project Team was working to develop a method that was acceptable to all TWG members. They suggested working with TWG members to develop a way to address this concern that could be presented at the next meeting. 
  The Project Team commented that they tried to be systematic and logical in developing mechanism categories and hypothesis statements, and the next step would be for the TWG to consider what had been developed and identify aspects that are missing or had not been captured properly so that those improvements could be made.
* A TWG member commented that they were concerned about the limits of the methodology that had been laid out. They had expected to look more broadly at common bottlenecks and pinch points.
  * A TWG member suggested that the way to proceed might be to consider mechanisms together from an ecological standpoint, including episodic events. They added that they were considering how to avoid fixating on a single mechanism.
  * The Project Team responded that the goal of this first exercise was to consider mechanisms individually and not how they interact. The Project Team asked the group whether they should look at how mechanisms were measured, and whether each mechanism included data evidence, expert opinion, or other evidence.
* A TWG member commented that the Project Team had developed a lot of variables and hypotheses that might affect Delta Smelt, which was developed through collective scientific opinion, and that the goal of this project should be to narrow that list to determine what aspects to focus on within the available timeframe. The member added that the group should document that the narrowed list did not indicate that other mechanisms were not important to Delta Smelt biology. 
* A TWG member commented that they supported what the Project Team had proposed as a first step, adding that while the exercise was constraining it was useful to work through. They said the comments column might receive a lot of comments indicating that experts were not comfortable with any of the choices from the drop down menu, and suggested an iterative process to reach consensus on the list in the dropdown menu.
  * The Project Team responded that the items in the spreadsheet’s drop down list are meant to encourage conversation. The Project Team added that they supported supplementing the process with a sensitivity analysis if feasible and if that would be supported by the TWG. They said that the whole process would be supplemented by TWG discussion.
* The Project Team commented that the proposed process was more formal than the approach for the IEP MAST conceptual model, and acknowledged it was possible that the group may not reach consensus through this process.
* A TWG member commented that this process was like treating individual symptoms, and that they would like to treat the problem more holistically rather than one stressor at a time. The member added that a targeted approach to reversing Delta Smelt population trajectory had been tried for decades, so they encouraged a holistic approach instead. 
* The TWG member continued to say that reaching agreement on important stressors for Delta Smelt biology will reveal that certain stressors are conditional on others, and certain stressors are not. 
* The Project Team asked how the current spreadsheet could be modified to provide a more holistic ranking option. 
  * The TWG member responded that the current spreadsheet was a useful tool to start the process if it is possible to reframe it to be more holistic further in the process. The member added that they did not have a suggestion for an alternate more holistic tool, but that they would consider what one might be. 
* A TWG member cautioned that if the group determined that certain variables were important to Delta Smelt biology, then from a management perspective those would be the only variables to be addressed. They added that the group should try to avoid this outcome.
  * The Project Team responded that most actions have multi-stressor impacts, and that they understood the TWG member’s concerns, but they did not foresee this group focusing solely on individual variables.
The Project Team asked how a holistic approach to addressing impacts would differ from this initial stressor-focused approach, using the example of predation as an impact on Delta Smelt biology.
  * A TWG member responded that a holistic approach would involve applying management actions when appropriate, identifying bottlenecks and causes and dealing with them in advance.
* The Project Team asked the TWG member what was meant by “bottlenecks.”
  * The TWG member responded that they were referring to Delta Smelt life stage transitions. They suggested, rather than considering individual mechanisms affecting Delta Smelt biology, exploring scenarios that could unfold at specific Delta Smelt life stages and considering actions that would address each scenario. This would allow deployment of those actions if those scenarios unfolded. 
  * The Project Team responded that they would like to discuss the scenarios the TWG member brought up further, and suggested setting up a follow-up meeting between the Project Team and the TWG member to discuss ways to integrate those ideas.
  * The TWG member commented that there were an endless number of such scenarios, and cautioned that it would be important to reduce these to a manageable list. 
* The group discussed establishing checkpoints to avoid the problem of too many scenarios. For example, when larval productivity is low there is no need to address predation of sub-adults. This will help avoid management action when they will not be effective.    
* The Project Team commented that they supported continuing down this path of considering holistic scenarios, and acknowledged the importance of incorporating episodic events. The Project Team emphasized the need to address tension between moving forward quickly and maintaining scientific rigor, and suggested moving forward with widely supported items.


## Next Steps and Work Planning
The Project Team presented a work plan for Phases 2 and 3 of the current project. 

* The process guidelines include a work plan for a two-year SDM process. 
* The Project Team hopes to complete a deep dive into Delta Smelt components quickly so that at the end of the first year there will be specific objectives to evaluate, metrics to use, and methods in place. 
* Year two of the SDM process would involve the actual SDM evaluation of alternative management actions.
* There will be periods of bi-weekly TWG conference calls to discuss progress, expert ratings, and lines of evidence.
* There will be additional small group and one-on-one meetings and email exchanges as needed.
* There will be in-person full-day meetings roughly every two months, and larger workshops with a wider group of experts if necessary. 
* A TWG member commented that bi-weekly calls made sense at the start of the process, and that call should be monthly at a minimum.
* A TWG member commented that they agreed, and added that opening the process to a larger forum could slow down the process.
* TWG members discussed availability for scheduling future meetings with a number of members indicating that Fridays would be good days for meetings. The Project Team indicated they would poll the group on subsequent meeting dates, targeting Fridays with some Wednesdays. 
* A TWG member asked what “Year1” included.
  * The Project Team responded that October marked the second month of the work plan, and that the Project Team would develop a calendar to share with the group.
* The group decided that they would discuss at the next meeting how best to share documents among the group, including questions of version control and who would house the documents. 
* The Project Team indicated that they would reflect on feedback received during the meeting, and adjourned the meeting.

